README prep for internal discussion (#19)
supabase/nix-postgres: README.md

# Nix Postgres Prototype

This repository contains **experimental code** to package PostgreSQL using nix.

## Install Nix
Follow installation guide at [installation](./docs/start-here.md).

# Evaluation Criteria

## Building multiple versions of PostgreSQL: 14, 15 and future versions

Supported major versions of Postgres are defined in [flake.nix basePackages](https://github.com/supabase/nix-postgres/blob/648e31bc7b629c6644b07ad378d04d3334403d78/flake.nix#L245-L246).

Each major version can be built independently.
```bash
nix build .#psql_14/bin -o result-14
nix build .#psql_15/bin -o result-15
```

> Builds Postgres 14 & 15 with all of our extensions and symlinks the resulting build artifaces e.g. `psql`, `pg_dump` etc at `result-15` and `result-15` respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Builds Postgres 14 & 15 with all of our extensions and symlinks the resulting build artifaces e.g. `psql`, `pg_dump` etc at `result-14` and `result-15` respectively.
```

On first run these commands will take a long time to complete. Intermediate results are cached and reused leading to significantly reduced built times on subsequent runs.

> The Postgres build itself is defined upstream in [nixpkgs#postgresqlXX](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/modules/services/databases/postgresql.nix). That distribution is frequently updated and historically has released minor and major updates within 10 days. We can optionally override the version number or vendor the derivation to support additional versions.

Reviewer: Correction since the link is to the NixOS module, not the postgresql build.

```suggestion
The Postgres build itself is defined upstream in [nixpkgs#postgresqlXX](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/servers/sql/postgresql/default.nix). That distribution is frequently updated and historically has released minor and major updates within 10 days. We can optionally override the version number or vendor the derivation to support additional versions.
```

Note that nixpkgs supports 1 minor version (the most recent) for each major version.

To launch a psql repl with the built version, first start the server:

```bash
nix run .#start-server 15
```
Next, launch the psql client.

```bash
nix run .#start-client 15
```

Both commands are defined in [flake.nix](./flake.nix)

## Building multiple versions of an extension: e.g. pgvector

Extensions included with the Postgres distribution come from two sources:

- Upstream in [nixpkgs](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tree/a996f7185eaaa8ae261adbc6b772761d62869796/pkgs/servers/sql/postgresql/ext)
- Locally in [./ext](./ext)

> Each extension has a default version that can be easily updated or overriden, but maintaining multiple versions of each extension long-term is not practical with current tooling.

Reviewer: Hm, this sounds like we cannot have builds running with different versions of an extension.

As Austin mentioned, we can do that by using different git tags or branches. i.e. we can have `git tag postgresql-15-with-supautils-1.1` or `git branch potgresql-15-with-supautils-1.2`

Maybe that could be clarified.
